docs: deephaven.ui dashboard crash course (#1057)
deephaven/deephaven-plugins: plugins/ui/docs/tutorial.md

This guide shows you how to build a dashboard with `deephaven.ui`. [`deephaven.ui`](https://github.com/deephaven/deephaven-plugins/tree/main/plugins/ui) is Deephaven’s Python library to create user interfaces. You’ll use a wide range of components supported by the library to get you familiar with what `deephaven.ui` provides and dive deep into simulated `iris` data, with live dataframes, visualizations, and interactivity, seamlessly integrated into a dashboard.  
First, you'll learn the basic `deephaven.ui` components. Basic components use panels, which are individual and adjustable windows within Deephaven. Tables, charts, and other components are rendered in panels.  
After creating panels, you'll create a dashboard. A dashboard is a collection of panels that open in a separate window within Deephaven.  
Then, you'll create a custom panel component. Custom components enable rich interactivity within your panels and dashboards.  
Finally, you'll embed your custom component into your dashboard.  

![img](_assets/deephaven-ui-crash-course/iris_species_dashboard_final.png)
To follow along, you need the [`deephaven.ui`](https://pypi.org/project/deephaven-plugin-ui/) package.  

> You also need simulated data and charts from [`deephaven.plot.express`](https://pypi.org/project/deephaven-plugin-ui/). You’ll create the simulated `iris` data below. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You also need simulated data and charts from [`deephaven.plot.express`](https://pypi.org/project/deephaven-plugin-ui/). You’ll create the simulated [`iris` data set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iris_flower_data_set) below. 
```

Author: added

sepal_tabs = ui.tabs(
    ui.tab(sepal_flex, title="Sepal Length vs. Sepal Width"),
    ui.tab(sepal_length_hist, title="Sepal Length Histogram"),
    ui.tab(sepal_width_hist, title="Sepal Width Histogram"),
)
sepal_flex_tabs = ui.flex(sepal_text, sepal_tabs, direction="column")

about_markdown = ui.markdown(r"""
### Iris Dashboard

Explore the Iris dataset with **deephaven.ui**

- The data powering this dashboard is simulated Iris data
- Charts are from Deephaven Plotly Express
- Other components are from **deephaven.ui**
  """)

sepal_panel = ui.panel(sepal_flex_tabs, title="Sepal Panel")
about_panel = ui.panel(about_markdown, title="About")

iris_avg = iris.agg_by([agg.avg(cols=["SepalLength", "SepalWidth", "PetalLength", "PetalWidth"])], by=["Species"])
iris_max = iris.agg_by([agg.max_(cols=["SepalLength", "SepalWidth", "PetalLength", "PetalWidth"])], by=["Species"])
iris_min = iris.agg_by([agg.min_(cols=["SepalLength", "SepalWidth", "PetalLength", "PetalWidth"])], by=["Species"])

ui_iris_avg = ui.panel(iris_avg, title="Average")
ui_iris_max = ui.panel(iris_max, title="Max")
ui_iris_min = ui.panel(iris_min, title="Min")

> iris_agg_stack = ui.stack(ui_iris_avg, ui_iris_max, ui_iris_min)

Reviewer: This block doesn't work as is. Getting an error on the `ui.stack` ..

Author: removed that chunk. Shouldn't have been there yet anyways

Reviewer: Still getting an error here. Chunk not removed?

Author: Ooops. Absolutely, definitely removed this time.

`deephaven.ui` provides hooks to access table data. Each hook provides access to a specific part of the table and is updated when the table changes.  
The hooks are:
- [`ui.use_cell_data`](hooks/use_cell_data.md) - Access a single cell value
- [`ui.use_row_data`](hooks/use_row_data.md) - Access a row of data
- [`ui.use_row_list`](hooks/use_row_list.md) - Access a row as a list
- [`ui.use_column_data`](hooks/use_column_data.md) - Access a column of data
- [`ui.use_table_data`](hooks/use_table_data.md) - Access the entire table

> [!WARNING]
> Filter your table to only the data you need the hook to pull out. The hooks do not filter the table for you.

Create a custom component that pulls the min, max, and average values for `SepalLength` and `SepalWidth` for the selected `Species`.  
Wrap the values in [`ui.badge`](components/badge.md) components to display them. `ui.badge` components draw attention to specific values.  

```python
@ui.component

> def summary_badges(species):

Reviewer: This will be a nice place to use `dx.indicator`. But I like the use of badge in the meantime.

Author: Agreed!

# Create a Dashboard with `deephaven.ui`

> This guide shows you how to build a dashboard with [`deephaven.ui`](https://github.com/deephaven/deephaven-plugins/tree/main/plugins/ui), Deephaven’s Python library to create user interfaces. You’ll use a wide range of components supported by the library to familiarize you with what `deephaven.ui` provides and dive deep into simulated data with live dataframes, visualizations, and interactivity seamlessly integrated into a dashboard.  

Reviewer 2: I did a big grammar edit - I made it in a new branch, but I couldn't create a PR. I didn't change anything other than bullets and sentence structure. Two additional small questions

## Wrapping up

This wraps up the `deephaven.ui` dashboard crash course. In this course, you learned about the following components and concepts and created a dashboard with many of them:

- [`ui.table`](components/table.md)
- [`ui.text`](components/text.md)
- [`ui.flex`](components/flex.md)
- [`ui.tabs`](components/tabs.md)
- [`ui.markdown`](components/markdown.md)
- [`ui.dashboard`](components/dashboard.md)
- [`ui.row`](components/row.md)
- [`ui.column`](components/column.md)
- [`ui.stack`](components/stack.md)
- [`ui.component`](describing/your_first_component.md)
- [`ui.picker`](components/picker.md)
- [`ui.use_state`](hooks/use_state.md)
- [`ui.illustrated_message`](components/illustrated_message.md)
- [`ui.use_cell_data`](hooks/use_cell_data.md)
- [`ui.use_row_data`](hooks/use_row_data.md)
- [`ui.use_row_list`](hooks/use_row_list.md)
- [`ui.use_column_data`](hooks/use_column_data.md)
- [`ui.use_table_data`](hooks/use_table_data.md)
- [`ui.badge`](components/illustrated_message.md)
- [`dx.scatter`](../../plotly-express/main/scatter.md)
- [`dx.histogram`](../../plotly-express/main/histogram.md)
- [`dx.densityheatmap`](../../plotly-express/main/density_heatmap.md)

> - Component State

Reviewer 2: TODO: for these links

Author: @dsmmcken what should these links look like?

You can compare a specific statistic across the different `Species` within the same panel or move between panels to compare different statistics across `Species`.

```py
from deephaven import agg

iris_avg = iris.agg_by([agg.avg(cols=["SepalLength", "SepalWidth", "PetalLength", "PetalWidth"])], by=["Species"])
iris_max = iris.agg_by([agg.max_(cols=["SepalLength", "SepalWidth", "PetalLength", "PetalWidth"])], by=["Species"])
iris_min = iris.agg_by([agg.min_(cols=["SepalLength", "SepalWidth", "PetalLength", "PetalWidth"])], by=["Species"])

ui_iris_avg = ui.panel(iris_avg, title="Average")
ui_iris_max = ui.panel(iris_max, title="Max")
ui_iris_min = ui.panel(iris_min, title="Min")

iris_agg_stack = ui.stack(ui_iris_avg, ui_iris_max, ui_iris_min)
    
iris_dashboard_stack = ui.dashboard(iris_agg_stack)
```

![img](_assets/deephaven-ui-crash-course/iris_dashboard_stack.png)

## Interactivity

So far, you’ve worked with `deephaven.ui` components that don’t interact with each other. Now, you’ll create your own component with interactivity and embed it into your dashboard.  

> Since you're investigating `SepalLength` and `SepalWidth`, create a [`dx.densityheatmap`](../../plotly-express/main/density_heatmap.md) chart that shows the density of `SepalLength` and `SepalWidth`, with a `Species` filter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since this walkthrough investigates `SepalLength` and `SepalWidth`, this section shows you how to create a [`dx.densityheatmap`](../../plotly-express/main/density_heatmap.md) chart that shows the density of `SepalLength` and `SepalWidth`, with a `Species` filter.
```

```py
@ui.component
def species_panel():
  species, set_species = ui.use_state()
  species_picker = ui.picker(
    species_table,
    on_change=set_species,
    selected_key=species,
    label="Current Species"
  )

  heatmap = ui.illustrated_message(
      ui.icon("vsFilter"),
      ui.heading("Species required"),
      ui.content("Select a species to display filtered table and chart."),
      width="100%",
  )

  if species:
    filtered_table = iris.where("Species = species")

    heatmap = dx.density_heatmap(filtered_table, x="SepalLength", y="SepalWidth")

  return ui.panel(ui.flex(species_picker, heatmap, direction="column"), title="Investigate Species")

species_picker_panel = species_panel()
```

![img](_assets/deephaven-ui-crash-course/species_picker_panel_illustrated.png)

### Utilizing custom components

Next, embed your custom component in your dashboard.

```python
iris_species_dashboard = ui.dashboard(
    ui.column(
        ui.row(about_panel, iris_agg_stack), ui.row(sepal_panel, species_picker_panel)
    )
)
```
![img](_assets/deephaven-ui-crash-course/iris_species_dashboard.png)

> There is lots of empty space in the top row. Resize the height of the top row to 1 and the bottom row to 2 for a ratio of 1:2, so the bottom row is twice the height of the top row.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The top row contains lots of empty space. Resize the height of the top row to 1 and the bottom row to 2 for a ratio of 1:2, so the bottom row is twice the height of the top row.  
```

### `ui.use_row_data` and `ui.badge`

You've got a density heatmap that shows the density of `SepalLength` and `SepalWidth` by `Species`, but it's tricky to see the min, max, and average overall values for `SepalLength` and `SepalWidth` for the selected `Species`. They're in your table stack, but you can make them more prominent.  

`deephaven.ui` provides hooks to access table data. Each hook provides access to a specific part of the table and is updated when the table changes.  
The hooks are:
- [`ui.use_cell_data`](hooks/use_cell_data.md) - Accesses a single cell value.
- [`ui.use_row_data`](hooks/use_row_data.md) - Accesses a row of data.
- [`ui.use_row_list`](hooks/use_row_list.md) - Accesses a row as a list.
- [`ui.use_column_data`](hooks/use_column_data.md) - Accesses a column of data.
- [`ui.use_table_data`](hooks/use_table_data.md) - Accesses the entire table.

> [!WARNING]
> Filter your table to only the data you need the hook to pull out. The hooks do not filter the table for you.

Create a custom component that pulls the min, max, and average values for `SepalLength` and `SepalWidth` for the selected `Species`.  

> Wrap the values in [`ui.badge`](components/badge.md) components to display them. `ui.badge` components draw attention to specific values.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To display the values, wrap them in [`ui.badge`](components/badge.md) components, which draw attention to specific values.  
```

    )

@ui.component
def create_species_dashboard():
    species, set_species = ui.use_state()
    species_picker = ui.picker(
        species_table,
        on_change=set_species,
        selected_key=species,
        label="Current Species",
    )

    heatmap = ui.illustrated_message(
        ui.icon("vsFilter"),
        ui.heading("Species required"),
        ui.content("Select a species to display filtered table and chart."),
        width="100%",
    )

    badges = None

    if species:
        filtered_table = iris.where("Species = species")

        heatmap = dx.density_heatmap(filtered_table, x="SepalLength", y="SepalWidth")

        badges = summary_badges(species)

    species_panel = ui.panel(
        ui.flex(species_picker, badges, heatmap, direction="column"),
        title="Investigate Species",
    )

    sepal_panel = create_sepal_panel(set_species)

    return ui.column(
        ui.row(about_panel, iris_agg_stack, height=1),
        ui.row(sepal_panel, species_panel, height=2),
    )

iris_species_dashboard_badge = ui.dashboard(create_species_dashboard())
```

![img](_assets/deephaven-ui-crash-course/iris_species_dashboard_final.png)

### `ui.use_memo`

> `ui.use_memo` allows you to cache expensive calculations so they are only recalculated when needed. `ui.use_memo` takes a function and a list of dependencies. If the dependencies change, the function is recalculated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ui.use_memo` allows you to cache expensive calculations so they are only recalculated when needed. It takes a function and a list of dependencies. If the dependencies change, the function is recalculated.
```

Since you've added badges to the dashboard, the `dx.heatmap` is recreated every time any of the badges change, but only needs to be recreated when the `Species` changes.  

> Heatmap is a fairly expensive chart to create, requires a filtered table in this case, and changes rarely, so pull the heatmap creation into a separate function and use `ui.use_memo` to cache the heatmap creation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Heatmap is a fairly expensive chart to create (it requires a filtered table in this case) and changes rarely, so pull the heatmap creation into a separate function and use `ui.use_memo` to cache the heatmap creation.
```

        ui.icon("vsFilter"),
        ui.heading("Species required"),
        ui.content("Select a species to display filtered table and chart."),
        width="100%",
    )
    
    if species:
        filtered_table = iris.where("Species = species")
        heatmap = dx.density_heatmap(filtered_table, x="SepalLength", y="SepalWidth")
        
    return heatmap
    
@ui.component
def create_species_dashboard():
    species, set_species = ui.use_state()
    species_picker = ui.picker(
        species_table,
        on_change=set_species,
        selected_key=species,
        label="Current Species",
    )
    
    heatmap = ui.use_memo(lambda: create_heatmap(species), [species])

    badges = summary_badges(species) if species else None

    species_panel = ui.panel(
        ui.flex(species_picker, badges, heatmap, direction="column"),
        title="Investigate Species",
    )

    sepal_panel = create_sepal_panel(set_species)

    return ui.column(
        ui.row(about_panel, iris_agg_stack, height=1),
        ui.row(sepal_panel, species_panel, height=2),
    )

iris_species_dashboard_final = ui.dashboard(create_species_dashboard())
```

</details>

> Finally, you’ve completed this dashboard crash course, with your custom component and interactivity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You've now completed this dashboard crash course with your custom component and interactivity.
```

## Wrapping up

This wraps up the `deephaven.ui` dashboard crash course. In this course, you learned about the following components and concepts and created a dashboard with many of them:

- [`ui.table`](components/table.md)
- [`ui.text`](components/text.md)
- [`ui.flex`](components/flex.md)
- [`ui.tabs`](components/tabs.md)
- [`ui.markdown`](components/markdown.md)
- [`ui.dashboard`](components/dashboard.md)
- [`ui.row`](components/row.md)
- [`ui.column`](components/column.md)
- [`ui.stack`](components/stack.md)
- [`ui.component`](describing/your_first_component.md)
- [`ui.picker`](components/picker.md)
- [`ui.use_state`](hooks/use_state.md)
- [`ui.illustrated_message`](components/illustrated_message.md)
- [`ui.badge`](components/illustrated_message.md)
- [`ui.use_cell_data`](hooks/use_cell_data.md)
- [`ui.use_row_data`](hooks/use_row_data.md)
- [`ui.use_row_list`](hooks/use_row_list.md)
- [`ui.use_column_data`](hooks/use_column_data.md)
- [`ui.use_table_data`](hooks/use_table_data.md)
- [`ui.use_memo`](hooks/use_memo.md)
- [`dx.scatter`](core/plotly/docs/box)
- [`dx.histogram`](core/plotly/docs/histogram)

> - [`dx.density_heatmap`](core/plotly/docs/density_heatmap)

Reviewer 3: you need the leading slash.

/core

is not a relative path.

Author: done

> - [`dx.densityheatmap`](../../plotly-express/main/density_heatmap.md)

Reviewer 3: these links won't work

Author: done

- Component State

> - Custom Components

Reviewer 3: remove if not linking to anything

Author: done
